During my time, the various years that I served as UN special rapporteur for freedom of
religion and belief, I've always been in touch with Joe with witnesses, including when
undertaking country-specific fact-finding missions because Joe with witnesses are one of
the communities very much under threat, but with little public attention giving to their
situation. So it's all the more important that we become aware of the dramas unfolding
there. I mean, if you have a look at the legislation extremism, everyone seems to agree,
yeah, it's important that we combat extremist tendencies, but it remains totally undefined,
so really serving as a proxy, as an entry point, as an excuse for whatever the authorities
wish to do. And Joe with witnesses have been the ideal scape quote, because many people
feel a bit suspicious because Joe with witnesses are active, they do missionary work, not
everyone likes it, even though it's totally peaceful, in exercise of their freedom of
a literal belief. If Joe with witnesses are extremists, I think we all are. I mean, this is really
the example of a legislation which is so vaguely circumscribed that it really gives the
authorities carte blanche to go after wherever they wish. It creates a climate of intimidation
of threat, and of course it goes against the spirit and the letter of human rights.
So people in Russia, but also the international community, really have to pay a lot of attention
to what is going on there. This is really something where also Russian citizens, all of them
are concerned, because the more the space for minorities will be shrinking, the more democracy
itself will in the end be at risk. Either we have the space where freedom of religion or belief
can manifest itself free from coercion, free from intimidation, free from absurd threats in the
name of fighting extremism, or the space will shrink more and more. And this is something we have
observed in many countries. So any particular religious community being targeted scapegoated
by the state will shrink the space for all. So it's also in the interest of other religious
communities, including the majority, to have that space for the free articulation of faith,
because only free articulation of faith is authentic faith. So in the end, this is also in the
interest of the majority, even though not everyone may see it that way.